---
title: "Reflections on My Year in China"
date: "2018-12-13"
tags: ["personal"]
---

My tenure in China is coming to an end. Pretty crazy, right? Sometimes it’s hard to keep track of what’s changed, or when it’s changed, or how it’s changed. I think that’s a product of the working lifestyle; unlike school where periods of accomplishment (semesters) have dedicated periods for reflection (breaks) and tangible measures of success (report cards), here in the workforce it’s always onto the next thing. And then the next. And the next. And so it goes. It’s good to take a minute and reflect a bit.

Speaking of work, it’s mostly the reason my stay in China is concluding. Because the right move for me is to leave this job, and seeing how it’s impossible to find work without a college degree, looks like I’ve got to head back to the USA. Why is moving jobs the right move, you ask? I think the core of it is that people don’t really care about programming here. It’s not a good environment to get to where I want to be. So, away I go.

I wasn’t always so pessimistic about it, though. My first few months here were lots of fun. I was sort of a rogue, sitting at my desk all day optimizing things. That was good fun. And then I’d go home and, well, program some more. I hadn’t met so many people yet at that point, and had no life, so I just wrote code. And I had a good time doing it, too.

Around April, I was thrust into the engineering office. I started working together with Chinese-only coworkers, attending Chinese-only meetings, and adding new features directly to the primarily chinglish codebase. “Okay,” I thought, “trial by fire.” But then a month goes by, and then another. Then 6 months have gone by, and it’s all still the same old grind. There’s something to be said here about the lazy millennial not being able to stick with things without immediate payoff, I guess, but at the end of the day I just took a step back and figured it’s time to move on. Plus I’m not a millennial.

To tell the truth, I have no real complaints about my experience working here. In all possible complaints, the silver lining is extremely valuable––learning to communicate effectively, improving my Mandarin by a ton, identifying antipatterns (and why they’re antipatterns), really learning to appreciate the value of best programming practices. And it’s not like my growth as an engineer has been stunted either; through hundreds of tutorials, blogs, and awesome open source projects, I have had plenty of exposure to and practice with excellence. It’s just that, well, the trial by fire that I mentioned earlier isn’t something that I want to conquer.

For the past year _ has been telling me to not marry until I’m 30, and people like _ have echoed the same sentiment. Of course, I don’t think they mean that literally. The way I interpret it is that I need to make sure I know enough about myself, my own nature, and my wants before I choose to settle down with somebody––otherwise, I’m in for a rude awakening. I’d always kind of brushed off that advice before––not that I didn’t respect what they were saying, but because I figured it wasn’t applicable to my life––but I think when _ came to visit I really came around to what they were saying. Growing up I always figured, hey, _ has it made. This dude is _. He had a house. Two Xboxes. Great job. Dog. But now seems he’s back on the grind again, figuring out how to date people, make a name for himself, all that jazz. Really made me come around to the uncertainty of life; how it really switches up on you and comes at you fast. You gotta know what you’re doing, is the conclusion I came to. And also you gotta do it. So that’s what I’ll do: figure out how I want to spend the rest of my life. So, where do I start? Can’t be sure. I’m only 18, after all, so I can’t speak from experience or anything.

On Joe Rogan’s podcast, something that’s discussed a lot is that we––human beings––are just animals. We have a nature, and much of it has been predetermined through millions of years of evolution. And while we can change our behavior through deliberate practice and discipline, it’s extremely difficult and there’s not always much sense in trying to do so. We’re not our own slaves, you know?. We can’t just tell ourselves to be happy, or enjoy a job, or sometimes even get up in the morning. We have a nature.

Bumblebees. You think bumblebees wake up every morning going “ah darn, I have to go make some honey, I hate that”? No way! It’s like Duncan Trussell said. I’m not a bee scientist, and certainly neither is Duncan Trussell, but I’d bet money on that bumblebee loving to go out with her buddies and roll around in flowers and building a sweet beehive. I bet it’s her favorite thing in the whole wide world. And so, that’s all she does. She never stops. And then she dies, having lived life exactly the way that nature had planned for her, happy as can be. Happy as can bee. Haha. 

So anyways seems to me following along with what nature has already determined will make me happy is probably the way to go. That’s where I’ll start. And my understanding of that nature––which I gotta probably look into some more––is that there are two main components to it: 1) dedication to a craft, and 2) raising kids, which most likely involves monogamy. I think the jury’s still out on whether or not humans are monogamous by nature, but I’m pretty sure 2-parent home is good for kids and I come from a monogamous culture, so it’s probably the way to go. So that’s the plan, and, I do gotta keep in mind, one that is subject to change, because again really what the heck do I know. Yep, a wife and kids to grow old next to, and a fulfilling craft to dedicate my life’s work to.

It’s not quite as simple as ordering a mail-order bride and sitting in front of a computer for 12 hours a day, no. Because that can all change in a flash. I don’t want to just have a shot at living a happy life, I want to live a happy life. I don’t just want to marry my soulmate and get my dream job, I want to also learn *how* to marry my soulmate and get my dream job. Because otherwise what happens if my wife dies? And then a robot takes my job? Am I gonna just drift aimlessly? Start all over from square one? I sure hope not!

As Eisenhower said, “plans are useless, but planning is indispensable.” So that’s what Ima do: plan towards those two goals, try to make those plans reusable and extensible as possible. Like building software. If I gotta start all over again and build my way back up to my end game, I’m making sure that I’m not starting from square one, but from square 4 or 5. You know Sisyphus, the guy who rolls the rock up the mountain over and over again? That’s bad news. Ima dig some checkpoints into the mountain on my way up. If that makes sense.

Okay let’s put some thought into it. Dedication to a craft:

1. **Diversity in attempted hobbies**. I should try things to see if they interest me, and stay aware of what attracts me to them and why. I don’t want to just learn about what interests me; I want to use those interests to discover things about my nature. Because that information is reusable and extensible. Kapeesh? Kapeesh.

2. **Dedication to a craft**. Duh. This one’s pretty easy too because I’ve already been doing it. I should make sure to always be vigilant about best practices in this dedication though, and explore things about my nature that cause me to gain or lose passion, how to best manage my time, and practices for efficient learning and development. I’ve accumulated some good knowledge on this. One that I always like to keep in mind is the “exposure to excellence + deliberate practice” recipe for learning skills. So I just gotta keep going. With that said, it’s also important that I don’t pigeonhole myself into a craft that isn’t best-fit for my nature––this is where points 1 and 3 come in.

3. **Have a backup**. This goes right back to point 1) about diversifying hobbies, and what I mean is basically I should have one hobby that rises above the others. It’ll help me stay more focused and consistent, and plus it might allow me to pivot from my primary craft. Maybe. I’ve heard hobbies don’t always translate well into careers. That’s okay, no need to worry about that. Anyways, continuing on, in my life currently, implementing this point means I gotta get going with point 1 so that I can figure out my interests. Starting night classes once I settle into my new job is a good enough first step in this direction. Is this point even necessary to write out? I’m a little worried about floundering about a bunch of different hobbies and never settling on one. Waffling, that’s a good word for it. Waffling around. I guess if I just try out a bunch of stuff, I’ll naturally settle on spending most of my time on one that I really enjoy. Yeah. Whatever.

Actually, in pretty related news, I’ve been thinking about med school recently. As a craft, I do love programming, but it can be unfulfilling, and I feel like I could be good at surgery. We’ll see. Joe says before I start anything to go into an operating room and watch people get diced up to see if I can handle it. That’s pretty solid advice. He also made “army doctor” sound like a good gig, so I’ll look into that later. It’s not something I’m focusing on right now.

Raising kids. All the time people give up on their own dreams out of love for their kids. That’s pretty special. That’s pretty powerful.

**People skills**.  I gotta understand people. Crucial conversations, signaling, situational awareness, all that. Knowledge of human nature. Being able to identify things about people’s nature would be a great skill, and to do it accurately and quickly would be huge. And not just other people, but my relationships with them too; being able to quickly identify deficiencies in relationships and better cultivate real, meaningful connections with people needs to happen. This is very closely related to me finding a wife and raising kids––after all, I should be able to understand and communicate with them above anyone else. So what’s to be done? Well, stay social, for one. I’ve been pretty good on that. Always be dating, because relationship experience is invaluable. Well maybe not always, but it should always rank high on my list of priorities. I could even test relationships. Date somebody who sucks. Maybe somebody I’m not physically attracted to. You know? Again, learning things about my own nature here is a big deal. Plus, reading books to gain tools for working with people. Crucial Conversations was pretty great.

Actually that’s all I’ve got. At the core of all of these points is perspective. Perspective about other people’s passion can lead to passion of my own, perspective about other people’s nature can help me better understand myself and others. 

“Default behavior” is a good thing to bring up. Having default behaviors and set priorities should make every decision easier, allow me to not sweat short-term small stuff, and generally make life much less stressful. I mean, if for every decision I come across all I gotta do is consider my long-term goals and choose the decision that is the best for those goals, then that’s the way to go. Obviously it’s not always that simple, and even weighing options against goals is no small task. But for most small cases, such as “should I ask this girl out” or “should I go and dance with these old ladies in the park” or “should I buy this thing” or “should I get out of bed because it’s freezing cold” or “should I go to this event even though I’m nervous about it” having a plan to follow makes it a bit easier. I’ll know the right answer, then it’s just a matter of following through.

Interestingly, Jordan Peterson was just on Joe Rogan’s podcast again and was talking about finding your own boundaries when you’re in your twenties; seeing how far you can push yourself in terms of socialization, work, etc. Pretty relevant. I’ve only started listening to podcasts in these past few months, and they’re pretty great. I’ve mentioned Joe Rogan twice, I’ve listened to his the most. It’s great for gaining perspective and learning about things. He interviews all kinds of people, from Ben Shapiro to Gary Johnson to David Goggins. Duncan Trussell’s podcast is also pretty great for that; he talks a lot about philosophy with people. He also had two episodes with his dying mother that were great pieces of audio. NPR’s Hidden Brain is a pretty great compliment to Joe Rogan’s podcast because it also puts forth perspective in an interview format, but while Joe Rogan’s interviews focus on reflection and accomplishment, Hidden Brain is much more about getting into people’s heads and being able to empathize with them in the moment. Basically I’ve found that Hidden Brain helps build compassion, while Joe Rogan helps build self-reflection. Hope that makes sense.

---

As I read over what I wrote previously, it became abundantly clear that what I’m trying to get at is emotional intelligence. Like, everything I’ve been writing about has been about EQ. I’m not sure how I missed it.

Good thing though, because now all I have to do is take what I’ve written––which was essentially just me dumping a train of thought onto a keyboard––and organize it into the frameworks provided by books like *7 Habits of Highly Effective People* or *Working with Emotional Intelligence* or all those other books.

So let’s parse this, and start with Daniel Goleman's *Working with Emotional Intelligence*. I guess the extent to which I should focus on Goleman’s––or anyone’s, for that matter––view of the world is debatable, but unfortunately due to my youth my own opinions don’t have much of a say in that debate. So, I’ll go for it. Work my analytical skills a little bit. *Working with Emotional Intelligence* was clearly the result of a lot of research and expertise so I’ll draw from that. Books full of anecdotes like *The 48 Laws of Power* and a lot of Malcolm Gladwell’s stuff, not so much.

In short, Daniel Goleman argues that once you are above a certain IQ threshold, success is primarily determined by EQ. He identifies 5 components––which he calls competencies or capabilities or something––of EQ:

1. Self-awareness
2. Self-regulation
3. Motivation
4. Empathy
5. Social Skills

The first three are personal, and the last two are social. Already it’s pretty obvious to see the connections between what I was talking about earlier and this framework; the ‘people skills’ I talked about are ‘social skills,’ ‘dedication to a craft’ is largely up to motivation. The plans I set forth about achieving those goals before still apply. There are some other actions that need to be taken, though:

**Read!** Basically do what I’m doing now; read books and parse the information and apply them to my life. If I think about all the great books I’ve read, all of them do focus on some aspect of EQ. *Thinking: Fast and Slow* boosted self-awareness and self-regulation, *Crucial Conversations* was all about empathy and social skills, etc. This is a pretty easy one because I already do it.

Actually, that’s all I got. Besides that, just do the stuff I mentioned earlier about gaining perspective and all that. The good thing here is that my personal website is in the works, so I’ll have a good place to put all of my notes on podcasts, books, anything. Pretty cool.

Let’s talk about *7 Habits of Highly Effective People*, because that was another good one. Here they are:

1. Be proactive
2. Begin with the end in mind
3. Put first things first
4. Think win-win
5. Seek first to understand, then be understood
6. Synergize
7. Sharpen the saw

Hmm actually this is started to get a little repetetive. I’ll just leave it at that, it’s enough for me to go off of.

Regarding motivation, David Goggins said something really interesting about listening to music to get pumped. He said, “what happens when you take the headphones off, and then you get popped in the mouth?” Makes sense. He also yelled out, "your headphones are on the sidelines!" and it was funny. But yeah, it’s not so good if you need external things like music in order to get focused or disciplined or push yourself or whatever. To be able to have that drive and focus come from within, and just be alone with your own thoughts as you push yourself, and still be able to overcome your own nature, there’s definitely power in that. I’ll give it a shot. So there’s another small, easy action I can take: **no music while working out or anything**.

I’ve kind of come full circle here, huh. I began talking about, “hey, all I need to do is to follow my nature to live a happy life, no need to be a maniac and destroy myself,” only to come to the realization here that, yeah, serious discipline and focus is required to get what I want.

Planning here isn’t just about eventually getting a long term payoff. That’s too uncertain and frankly it’s not motivating enough for me on a day-to-day basis. And anyways, why shouldn’t there be immediate benefits? If I go through life with a plan in mind, I shouldn’t have to think about small stuff: short-term consequences should be trivial to compare against one another, decision-making should be much more clear, and generally life should involve much less stress and uncertainty. So how do I take what I’ve written here and use it in a way to ensure that this happens?

The good news: this is easy to talk about, and it should really just be a matter of focus and self-honesty. But it’s certainly not easy, either. When I first got to China, a clear objective of mine was to go and make friends––and yet, when the time came to actually go to to meetup events or whatever to meet some people, I really had to push myself to go. On more than one occasion, I bailed in favor of some other comfort zone stuff. That’s a lack of focus, clearly got in the way of my goals. I’ve failed at this before.

The remedy for that is, well, focus. Focus on goals, focus on the long term, all that. The problem now is that focus takes discipline, though, so unfortunately we have a bit of a catch 22 situation here.

I do feel like simplifying things is the key here. Again, taking my own opinions with a thing of salt, but breaking out of this catch 22 by using a simplified model of the world does seem to be the way to go. Don’t want to get up in the morning and work out because it’s cold and I’m sick? Simplify it. Tell myself, hey, all I gotta do here is throw these covers off and stand up. I can control these arms. It’s easy. And then it’s just a matter of putting one foot in front of the other. Want a girlfriend? Start asking people out. Want to learn something? Go learn it. Something not working in my life? Change it. That’s it, don’t overthink it. Okay that still requires discipline and focus. Oh well. There’s no easy answer, big whoop. Just do it, you know? Don’t be a b word. At the end of the day it’s just a matter of establishing habits. People do it all the time. I do it all the time. Also don’t be a moron. It’s not like I can follow a flow chart or something and bada bing bada boom life is easy. Okay this is starting to get really repetitive so I’m done now. This is good enough for me to go off of. I’ll reflect on it later.
